[FLINK-9311] [pubsub] Added PubSub source connector with support for checkpointing (ATLEAST_ONCE) (#6594)
apache/flink: docs/dev/connectors/pubsub.md

---
title: "Google PubSub"
nav-title: PubSub
nav-parent_id: connectors
nav-pos: 7
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

This connector provides a Source and Sink that can read from and write to
[Google PubSub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub). To use this connector, add the
following dependency to your project:

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
  <artifactId>flink-connector-pubsub{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>

>   <version>{{site.version }}</version>

Reviewer: Fixed

</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the streaming connectors are currently not part of the binary
distribution. See

> [here]({{site.baseurl}}/dev/linking.html)

Reviewer 2: Missing spaces around the braces

for information about how to package the program with the libraries for
cluster execution.

#### PubSub Source

> The connector provides a Source for reading data from Google PubSub to Apache Flink. PubSub has an Atleast-Once guarantee and as such.

Reviewer: Fixed

The class `PubSubSource(…)` has a builder to create PubSubsources. `PubSubSource.newBuilder()`

> There are several optional methods to alter how the PubSubSource is created, the bare minimum is to provide a google project and pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Reviewer: Fixed

Example:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

DeserializationSchema<SomeObject> deserializationSchema = (...);

> SourceFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSource = PubSubSource.<SomeObject>newBuilder()

Reviewer: Yes

                                                      .withDeserializationSchema(deserializationSchema)
                                                      .withProjectSubscriptionName("google-project-name", "pubsub-subscription")
                                                      .build();

streamExecEnv.addSource(pubsubSource);
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

#### PubSub Sink

The connector provides a Sink for writing data to PubSub.

The class `PubSubSource(…)` has a builder to create PubSubsources. `PubSubSource.newBuilder()`

This builder works in a similar way to the PubSubSource.
Example:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

SerializationSchema<SomeObject> serializationSchema = (...);

> SourceFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSink = PubSubSink.<SomeObject>newBuilder()

Reviewer 3: This should be SinkFunction, right?
So
`SinkFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSink = PubSubSink.<SomeObject>newBuilder()`

                                                  .withSerializationSchema(serializationSchema)
                                                  .withTopicName("pubsub-topic-name")
                                                  .withProjectName("google-project-name")
                                                  .build()

streamExecEnv.addSink(pubsubSink);
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

#### Google Credentials

Google uses [Credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/production) to authenticate and authorize applications so that they can use Google cloud resources such as PubSub. Both builders allow several ways to provide these credentials.

By default the connectors will look for an environment variable: [GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/production#obtaining_and_providing_service_account_credentials_manually) which should point to a file containing the credentials.

> It is also possible to provide a Credentials object directly. For instance if you read the Credentials yourself from an external system. In this case you can use `PubSubSource.newBuilder().withCredentials(...)`

Reviewer: Fixed

#### Integration testing

> When using integration tests you might not want to connect to PubSub directly but use a docker container to read and write to. This is possible by using `PubSubSource.newBuilder().withHostAndPort("localhost:1234")`.

Reviewer: Fixed

KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

This connector provides a Source and Sink that can read from and write to
[Google PubSub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub). To use this connector, add the
following dependency to your project:

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
  <artifactId>flink-connector-pubsub{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>
  <version>{{ site.version }}</version>
</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the streaming connectors are currently not part of the binary
distribution. See
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/linking.html)
for information about how to package the program with the libraries for
cluster execution.

#### PubSub Source

The connector provides a Source for reading data from Google PubSub to Apache Flink.
PubSub has an Atleast-Once guarantee and as such this is the best we can do
right now without adding a lot of extra complexity.

The class `PubSubSource(…)` has a builder to create PubSubsources. `PubSubSource.newBuilder()`

There are several optional methods to alter how the PubSubSource is created,

> the bare minimum is to provide a google project, pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Author: I don't understand what you are referring to here. Do you mean the capitalization? I've changed those now.

I've also updated the documentation with regard to the lastest changes and added a section about backpressure / metrics / tuning. Could you have a look at those as well?

> the bare minimum is to provide a google project, pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Reviewer 4: There is a line break at length 77, which is not consistent with the line breaks throughout the document.

> the bare minimum is to provide a google project, pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Reviewer 5: Sorry, you are right. I meant capitalization not indentation. Sorry & Thanks for addressing it.

                                                      .withProjectSubscriptionName("google-project-name", "pubsub-subscription")
                                                      .build();

streamExecEnv.addSource(pubsubSource);
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

#### PubSub Sink

The connector provides a Sink for writing data to PubSub.

The class `PubSubSource(…)` has a builder to create PubSubsources. `PubSubSource.newBuilder()`

This builder works in a similar way to the PubSubSource.
Example:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

SerializationSchema<SomeObject> serializationSchema = (...);
SinkFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSink = PubSubSink.<SomeObject>newBuilder()
                                                  .withSerializationSchema(serializationSchema)
                                                  .withTopicName("pubsub-topic-name")
                                                  .withProjectName("google-project-name")
                                                  .build()

> streamExecEnv.addSink(pubsubSink);

Reviewer 5: The `StreamExecutionEnvironment` doesn't have a method `addSink()`.

Author: Fixed

Both builders allow you to provide these credentials but by default the connectors will look for an environment variable: [GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/production#obtaining_and_providing_service_account_credentials_manually) which should point to a file containing the credentials.

If you want to provide Credentials manually, for instance if you read the Credentials yourself from an external system, you can use `PubSubSource.newBuilder(...).withCredentials(...)`.

### Integration testing

When running integration tests you might not want to connect to PubSub directly but use a docker container to read and write to. (See: [PubSub testing locally](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/emulator))

This is possible by using `PubSubSource.newBuilder().withHostAndPort("localhost:1234")`, note in this case the connector will use the `NoCredentialsProvider` from the `google-cloud-pubsub` sdk to make sure it connects properly with the docker container.

## Backpressure

> Backpressure can happen when the source function produces messages faster than the flink pipeline can handle.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Backpressure can happen when the source function produces messages faster than the Flink pipeline can handle.
```

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

DeserializationSchema<SomeObject> deserializationSchema = (...);
SourceFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSource = PubSubSource.newBuilder(deserializationSchema, "google-project", "subscription")
                                                .withBackpressureParameters(10_000L, 100_000L)
                                                .build();

streamExecEnv.addSource(source);
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

One important aspect to keep in mind is the 10000 messages limit is based on the amount of messages that has not been acknowledged yet. The connector will only acknowledge messages on successful checkpoints. This means if you checkpoint once every minute and you set the message limit to 10000. Your max throughput will be 10000 messages per minute.

> To give insight into this behavior 2 metrics have been added:

Reviewer 5: I would write `two` instead of 2. (https://www.grammarly.com/blog/when-to-spell-out-numbers/)

Author: Fixed

software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

This connector provides a Source and Sink that can read from and write to
[Google PubSub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub). To use this connector, add the
following dependency to your project:

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
  <artifactId>flink-connector-gcp-pubsub{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>
  <version>{{ site.version }}</version>
</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the streaming connectors are currently not part of the binary
distribution. See
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/projectsetup/dependencies.html)
for information about how to package the program with the libraries for
cluster execution.

## Consuming or Producing PubSubMessages

The connector provides a connectors for receiving and sending messages from and to Google PubSub.
Google PubSub has an `Atleast-Once` guarantee and as such the connector delivers the same guarantees.

> ### PubSub SourceFunction

Reviewer 6: Should we also mention that only pull mode is supported?

Author: Yeah makes sense! I've added it.

to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

This connector provides a Source and Sink that can read from and write to
[Google PubSub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub). To use this connector, add the
following dependency to your project:

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
  <artifactId>flink-connector-gcp-pubsub{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>
  <version>{{ site.version }}</version>
</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Note that the streaming connectors are currently not part of the binary
distribution. See
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/projectsetup/dependencies.html)
for information about how to package the program with the libraries for

> cluster execution.

Reviewer 5: Add a note that this connector is new and hasn't received widespread testing yet.

## Consuming or Producing PubSubMessages

The connector provides a connectors for receiving and sending messages from and to Google PubSub.

> Google PubSub has an `Atleast-Once` guarantee and as such the connector delivers the same guarantees.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Google PubSub has an `at-least-once` guarantee and as such the connector delivers the same guarantees.
```

### PubSub SourceFunction

The class `PubSubSource` has a builder to create PubSubsources: `PubSubSource.newBuilder(...)`

There are several optional methods to alter how the PubSubSource is created, the bare minimum is to provide a Google project, Pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Example:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

> DeserializationSchema<SomeObject> deserializer = (...);

Reviewer 5: the connector now uses a `PubSubDeserializationSchema` (see comments on it below)

cluster execution.
 
This pubsub connector has not received widespread testing yet.

## Consuming or Producing PubSubMessages

The connector provides a connectors for receiving and sending messages from and to Google PubSub.
Google PubSub has an `at-least-once` guarantee and as such the connector delivers the same guarantees.

### PubSub SourceFunction

The class `PubSubSource` has a builder to create PubSubsources: `PubSubSource.newBuilder(...)`

There are several optional methods to alter how the PubSubSource is created, the bare minimum is to provide a Google project, Pubsub subscription and a way to deserialize the PubSubMessages.

Example:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
StreamExecutionEnvironment streamExecEnv = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();

DeserializationSchema<SomeObject> deserializer = (...);
SourceFunction<SomeObject> pubsubSource = PubSubSource.newBuilder(deserializer, "project", "subscription")
                                                      .build();

streamExecEnv.addSource(source);
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

> Currently the source functions pulls messages from PubSub, [push endpoints](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/push) are not supported.

Author: Added!
